---
title: "Stories from 2024"
category: book-reviews
tags: scifi sociology dystopian short-story political speculative
---
Shorter-than-usual reviews for the books & short stories I've read in 2024. There were other books, but I'm saving those for later; they deserve longer essays.

<!--split-->

- [In Praise of Shadows — Jun'ichirō Tanizaki](#in-praise-of-shadows--junichirō-tanizaki)
- [The Man in the High Castle — Philip K. Dick](#the-man-in-the-high-castle--philip-k-dick)
- [Death and Designation Among the Asadi (Transfigurations) — Michael Bishop](#death-and-designation-among-the-asadi-transfigurations--michael-bishop)
- [Carnival — Elizabeth Bear](#carnival--elizabeth-bear)
- [The Concentration City — J. G. Ballard](#the-concentration-city--j-g-ballard)
- [Vilcabamba — Harry Turtledove](#vilcabamba--harry-turtledove)
- [Out Of All Them Bright Stars — Nancy Kress](#out-of-all-them-bright-stars--nancy-kress)

<!--split-->

## In Praise of Shadows — Jun'ichirō Tanizaki
April 9, 2024 | ★★★☆☆ | `non-fiction, essay`\
*1933 reflections on concepts in Japanese aesthetics.* 

Throughout many cultures, in history and unfortunately even today, women are often told to cover themselves to a greater extent than men. This is all usually done in the name of “modesty” (as defined by men). Tanizaki however says the Japanese women of old covered themselves and stayed in the shadows because it made them more beautiful, it increased seductiveness. Although the both still concede to the male gaze, I think we can still learn something from this; the former is restrictive, the latter is expressive. This would be similar to the way women have reclaimed makeup to heighten self-confidence rather than to seek validation from men. But change in our sense of aesthetics must occur on both sides—greater freedom (of dress) for some and greater restraint (of the desire to restrain others) for others—only then can equality be achieved.

As for the other topics, I don’t have much to say. For a long time I’ve agreed with subtlety, shadows, and natural textures. Plus, I have never witnessed a toilet being described so beautifully as here…

## The Man in the High Castle — Philip K. Dick
May 21, 2024 | ★★★★☆ | `alt-history, dystopian, multiperspective, psychological`\
*A post-WWII alternate history book in which Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany partition the USA. But instead of war being the focus, the story portrays the lives of small individuals with an undertone of mysticism and black comedy.*

It is clear that PKD did his cultural/political homework for worldbuilding, especially the I Ching. Everything about the alternate history felt believable. But at the same time, the way he blurs reality and surreality, like magical realism, like in that scene with the Embarcadero Freeway or the recurring theme of Eastern spirituality, all make it feel like the universe is stranger and larger than we initially thought. Like the characters are close to finding the truth. By lampshading the fact that this is merely a story (like metafiction from the SCP wiki), and by contrasting our universe to the story, our universe becomes part of the fiction, or vice versa: the fiction becomes more real.

I touched upon this in Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, but I quite like PKD’s writing style; how he covers such dark, serious, topics but tempers it with a certain sarcastic humour, like he doesn’t take himself seriously yet forces the reader to; a testament to his skill. This is one of the reasons why I started the TV series and didn’t finish it. It’s not bad, they just lost the original tone which I liked.

Overall, I really liked this book. The fact that this was written several decades ago and still holds up today is impressive. Something in the water of the 1960s—books from that era always hit different.

## Death and Designation Among the Asadi (Transfigurations) — Michael Bishop
May 16, 2024 | ★☆☆☆☆ | `sociology, sci-fi, aliens`\
*An anthropologist travels to the planet BoskVeld to study the Asadi, a primitive humanoid alien culture. But they may be more complex than he initially presumed, and this complexity leads to his own mental breakdown.*

I was disappointed with this one. I expected some profound revelation about the human condition at the end, but it was actually just an exploration of how alien aliens can get. Others have likened it to Solaris, but even Solaris at least contained theological discussion. But honestly, part of this disappointment is my own fault. As I’ve discussed in previous book reviews, I often only rate books low if I walk into them with a certain expectation which isn’t satisfied, while in fact books are under no obligation to satisfy my expectations. Maybe it should be noted as well that I only read Death and Designation, not the full Transfigurations novel. Perhaps the latter part of the story contains fuller explanations. I’ll read it some other time.

## Carnival — Elizabeth Bear
July 2, 2024 | ★★★★☆ | `sociology, espionage, political, speculative, romance`\
*An unlikely gay couple from a homophobic Earth governed by violent environmentalist AIs act as diplomats ostensibly returning stolen artwork to a world governed by radical misandry. But in their mission to steal the planet's secret energy technology, but they also stumble upon a fledgling men's civil rights movement.*

Much of the anthropological sci-fi I’ve read tends to look up toward the cultures being explored, but here is a dystopian universe, filled with extremism, in which there is nowhere ideal to live—radical violent feminism on one world, radical violent environmentalism on another. Showing the ugly side of every culture demonstrates how there is no perfect culture.

Besides those thematic strengths, aesthetically, some aspects of New Amazonian culture and the foreigners’ technology felt kind of gaudy to me; the worldbuilding didn’t feel particularly cohesive, and it was hard to visualize something I could take seriously.

As for the characters, I don’t know what it is about this story, but I felt really invested in them. Though none of them are exceptionally virtuous (they even acknowledge the moral greyness of all the cultures they come from), their behaviour and dialogue had me rooting for them, more than in other books I’ve read.

Lastly, the inclusion of…let’s call it a “non-human factor” in the plot, to avoid spoilers—though not deus ex machina in a traditional sense, since it was hinted at rather than sudden—still took some of my immersion away. This could have been a perfect example of anthropological/social sci-fi (and it still is good), but it kind of distracted from the focus on the human condition.

## The Concentration City — J. G. Ballard
August 5, 2024 | ★★★★☆ | `short-story, dystopian, speculative`\
*Imagine New York, with buildings stretching infinitely across, up, and down. Space (cubic feet, not square feet) is a scarce resource. But where does the train go if you stay on it?*

Non-Euclidean spaces are one of my favorite ideas in fiction, and the artwork I have seen of this city is truly inspiring. It makes me feel small. I’d like to visit a place like that, minus the poor living conditions.

The cultural worldbuilding, though not the main focus, is also well-thought-out. I am curious about the origin story of this universe though, like Borges’ The Library of Babel. I admire authors who have the confidence to do alternate-modern worldbuilding and just say “it has always been this way.” I don’t think I could do that. Maybe someday.

## Vilcabamba — Harry Turtledove
August 6, 2024 | ★★★★☆ | `short-story, sci-fi, war, political, tragedy`\
*A vestigial US government failing against the imperialistic Krolp; an allegory of the Spanish colonization of Peru.*

The feeling of hopelessness reminds me of I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream. Stories with bad endings are rare, but they evoke such powerful emotions. I like them.
The design of the aliens and their culture were almost ridiculous, but the fact that it mirrors what happened in our world forces it to be taken seriously.


## Out Of All Them Bright Stars — Nancy Kress
Aug. 7, 2024 | ★★★★★ | `short-story, sci-fi, political, aliens, speculative`\
*An alien tries to order a salad from a small diner.*

I think I read this a while ago as part of the IB curriculum, but I'm revisiting it now.

The way something so extraordinary is depicted in such a mundane setting is something I haven’t seen often in sci-fi involving aliens. And yet it works so well because, rather than xenobiology or worldbuilding being the focus of the story (normally I find humanoid alien designs too uncreative), Kress wanted to make a political statement. In this story, the literal alien is a composite character of marginalized humans throughout history. We’d like to think that humanity would behave differently in the face of first contact, but given our history, Kress writes with a tone of cynicism. The story has less of a “bad ending” as vilcabamba and I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream, but the powerlessness of the characters evokes, ironically, powerful emotions.